Type	Example	Details
Free Text	wide leaves. narrow shoots. enlarged root system.	"In this type of query, each sentence in the query is compared to each sentence in the phenotype descriptions associated with each gene in the dataset. Similarity between sentences is scored by taking the average of the maximum similarity between each word in the query and the most similar word in the phenotype description sentence. Word similarity in this case is defined be cosine simialrity between the embeddings for words found using a skip-gram word embeddings model trained on this datset of phenotype descriptions and supplemented with a dataset of related abstracts. For example, an example of a query is 'pathogen resistance', and one of the sentences describing a phenotype of a gene in the dataset could be 'plants show increased resistance to bacterial infection.'. The similarity between the query sentence and that sentence is found by taking the average of the similarities between each word in the query ('pathogen' and 'pathogen', 'resistance' and 'infection'). If the similarity between 'pathogen' and 'pathogen' is 1.0, and the similarity between 'resistance' and 'infection' is 0.8, then the score is 0.9. Multiple query sentences can be searched simultaneously by separating them in the query with periods. Genes in the dataset will be ranked in the results first based on the maximum score between any of its associated phenotype descriptions to any query sentences, and then by the average score obtained for each query sentence against any phenotype descriptions for a given gene."
Keywords & Keyphrases	"roots, leaves, bacterial infection"	"The search string used for this query should be a set of words or phrases (mutliple words) separated by commas. The genes that are returned for this query are those for which the one or more of the words or phrases appears in the phenotype descriptions associated with those genes. This is different from the free text query because exact string matching is used to identify matches, rather than accounting for similarity between related words. This type of query should be used when searching for genes with phenotypes that contain specific words or phrases.  "
Ontology Terms	"PATO:0000587, GO:0010029, PO:0020127"	"This type of query allows for searching against the annotations for the genes in the dataset. One or more ontology term IDs can be entered, separated either by whitespace or commas. The genes returned in the results were either annotated with one of those exact terms, or with a term that inherits one or more of those terms. The genes are ranked based on how many of the queried terms matched. "
Gene Identifiers	ATG7	"This type of query allows for searching for a particular gene based on the gene name, protein name, gene symbol, gene model, or any other kind of gene identifier that is represented in the dataset. After searching for a particular identifer, a list of matching genes is brought up, which will include more than one gene in the event that matches are found for multiple species. Selecting a particular gene from these candidate results will generate a list of returned genes including the gene you selected and otheres. These are genes with phenotype descriptions similar to the selected genes. In order to identify these genes, the sentences associated with the selected gene are compared to the sentences associated with each other gene in the dataset. These comparisons are done using cosine similarity to compare either [tf-idf vectors](link) or [document embeddings](link) for each sentence. The method of vectorization used can be changed in the sidebar. See the accompanying reference for more information about how these comparisons are performed. Genes are ranked first based on the maximum similarity between any sentence in their phenotype descriptions and any sentence associated with the selected genes, and then by the average similarity for between each sentence associated with the selected gene and any sentence in their phenotype descriptions."
		